# Object class in Java

- Parent class of all the classes in Java.
- Topmost class of Java.
- Provides some common behaviours to all the objects like cloning the object, comparing objects, etc.

## Methods of Object class

`public final Class getClass()`

- Returns the Class class object of this object.
- The Class class can further be used to get metadata of this object.

`public int hashCode()`

- Returns the hashcode number for the object.

`public boolean equals(Object obj)`

- Compares the given object to this object.

`protected Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException`

- Creates and returns the clone (exact copy) of the object.

`public String toString()`

- Returns the string representation of the object.

`public final void notify()`

- Wakes up single thread, waiting on the object's monitor.

`public final void notifyAll()`

- Wakes up all the threads, waiting on the object's monitor.

`public final void wait(long timeout)throws InterruptedException`

- Causes the current thread to wait for the specified milliseconds, until another thread notifies (invokes notify() or notifyAll() method).

`public final void wait(long timeout,int nanos)throws InterruptedException`

- causes the current thread to wait for the specified milliseconds and nanoseconds, until another thread notifies (invokes notify() or notifyAll() method).

`public final void wait()throws InterruptedException`

- causes the current thread to wait, until another thread notifies (invokes notify() or notifyAll() method).

`protected void finalize()throws Throwable`

- Invoked by the garbage collector before object is being garbage collected.
