# Object cloning in Java

- Way to create an exact copy of an object.
- `clone()` method of `Object` class is used to clone the objects.
- The `java.lang.Cloneable interface` must be implemented by the class whose object clone we want to create.
- If we don't implement Cloneable interface, clone() method generates `CloneNotSupportedException`.

## Why use `clone()` ?

```java
protected Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException
```

- The `clone()` method saves the extra processing task for creating the exact copy of an object.
- If we perform it by using the new keyword, it will take a lot of processing time to be performed that is why we use object cloning.

## Advantages of Object cloning

- No need to write lengthy and repetitive codes.
- Most easiest and efficient way for copying objects, especially if we are applying it to an already developed or an old project.
- `Clone()` is the fastest way to copy an array.

## Disadvantages of Object cloning

- To use the `Object.clone()` method, we have to change a lot of syntax to our code, like implementing a Cloneable interface, defining the clone() method and handling CloneNotSupportedException, and finally, calling Object.clone() etc.
- We have to implement cloneable interface while it doesn't have any methods in it. We just have to use it to tell the JVM that we can perform clone() on our object.
- Object.clone() is protected, so we have to provide our own clone() and indirectly call Object.clone() from it.
- Object.clone() doesn't invoke any constructor so we don't have any control over object construction.
- If you want to write a clone method in a child class then all of its superclasses should define the clone() method in them or inherit it from another parent class. Otherwise, the super.clone() chain will fail.
- Object.clone() supports only shallow copying but we will need to override it if we need deep cloning.

## Example

```java
// Student.java
package com.parth;

public class Student implements Cloneable {
	int rollNumber;
	String name;

	Student(int rollNumber, String name) {
		this.rollNumber = rollNumber;
		this.name = name;
	}

	public Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
		return super.clone();
	}
}

// Main.java
package com.parth;

public class Main {

	public static void main(String[] args) {
		try {
			Student s1 = new Student(101, "Parth");
			Student s2 = (Student) s1.clone();

			System.out.println(s1.rollNumber + " " + s1.name); // 101 Parth
			System.out.println(s2.rollNumber + " " + s2.name); // 101 Parth

		} catch (CloneNotSupportedException e) {
			System.out.println(e + e.getMessage());
		}
	}

}
```
